Hey everyone, it's Rachel. I'm here with
a quick announcement.
Part of what we do at the show, as you
know, is take you, our listeners, into
the world of an important story and
behind the journalism in the newsroom
here at the New York Times.
But we were thinking that there are
certain stories that are hard to do in a
busy news week and so many brilliant
people doing incredible things at the
times that might not end up on a regular
program. So, we decided we wanted to try
something new and fun. We're going to
bring you some other kinds of
conversations and stories. To begin
with, we'll sit down for a conversation
with our colleagues over in games, and
we're also going to show you how our
composers work in the audio department.
We have other ideas of fun things, but
these are the first two. And our plan is
to make these bonus conversations
available only for subscribers. It's a
way of saying thank you for supporting
the work that we do here at the show and
at the times.
And just to say, other shows are going
to do this, too. Ezra Klein is going to
do a book episode. You'll get special
early access to the next season of
Serial. And there will be lots of other
things for all of you who go to the
extra step of subscribing to the New
York Times. Just to be clear, you don't
have to subscribe to listen to the
regular show. And the most recent
episodes of the Daily will remain free
for everyone.
So, thank you for being a daily
listener. And if you want to learn more
about subscribing, you can go to ny
times.com/mpodcasts
or subscribe directly on Apple Podcast
or Spotify.
Okay, announcement over. Here's today's
show.
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
As the government shutdown enters its
second day, Democrats are determined to
make this growing political fight all
about the rising costs of healthcare.
Today, I speak to my colleagues Margot
Sanger Katz and Shane Goldmaker about
why the Democrats are betting on this
particular strategy and who is really to
blame.
[Applause]
It's Thursday, October 2nd.
[Music]
Margot, we are talking to you on the
first full day of the government
shutdown and Senate Democrats in
explaining why the government is shut
down have said that this is above all
about surging health care costs. And
Democrats are basically saying that in
some cases premiums for Americans, some
Americans are going to be doubling. And
I want to start there. Is that accurate?
>> On average that is accurate. So, this
applies to people who buy their own
insurance. So, people, if you don't get
insurance through work and you're not in
a government program like Medicaid or
Medicare, you might go to the Obamacare
marketplace and buy your own insurance.
And the government has set up subsidies
that help make that insurance affordable
for people. And some of these subsidies
are set to expire at the end of the
year. And when that happens, it means
the amount that people are going to have
to pay for their health insurance is
going to go up by a lot. On average, KFF
uh health research group has estimated
it's like 114% increase, but there's
actually a lot of variation under the
hood. For some really low-income people
who have been paying zero for their
health insurance, they're going to have
to pay somewhere between like 35 and $60
a month. But then as you go like up the
income scale, if you imagine someone
who's making like around $65,000 a year,
that's someone who might have to pay
like $20,000 more a year in some
markets.
>> Wow. So you see these really big
effects. They're uneven and they do
depend on how much you make, where you
live, and how old you are because
nothing about Obamacare is simple. But a
lot of people, and particularly people
in red states that did not expand
Medicaid, are going to be looking at
some very large sticker shock if these
subsidies expire. to hear the Democrats
tell it. The reason that they're
shutting down the government is because
they say Republicans are to blame for
these rising health care costs. And the
Democrats will not agree to fund the
government until Republicans back a
spending bill that lowers those health
care costs. That's the overall message,
right? So, I guess I'm wondering, how do
we actually get to this position that
we're in in the first place?
Well, I think as is the case with many
political questions, the answer to that
is a little bit tricky. I think you have
to go back to the politics of the
Democratic majorities in the Biden era.
So, as you may remember, the Democrats
had both the White House, the Senate,
and the House.
>> Mhm. So during the pandemic when
Democrats felt like they could spend a
lot of money to help prop up the
economy, they extended the subsidies
into this current system where the help
is just much more generous. And there
was a debate inside the Democratic party
about how long the subsidy should get
extended. A lot of Democrats, including
the White House and the Democratic
leadership, really wanted to make this a
permanent program. They felt like this
was an improvement on the original
Obamacare program. It was making
insurance more affordable. It was
bringing in lots of people who were
previously uninsured.
But they had kind of a small majority
and they had some members in their
caucus in the Senate who were pretty
conservative.
And one of them was Joe Mansion of West
Virginia, sort of the most conservative
member of the Democratic caucus. He was
concerned that the Democrats shouldn't
spend too much money.
>> And it turns out that subsidizing the
health insurance of uh, you know,
millions of Americans is actually pretty
expensive. and they absolutely needed
his vote to extend these subsidies
>> because Republicans were never going to
vote for these extensions.
>> Yeah. And so the compromise that the
Democratic leadership reached with
Senator Mansion was they would extend
these subsidies but only for a few
years, not forever.
>> So there was an expiration date on them
originally.
>> And there was also, I think, a
calculation. They specifically chose to
have them expire now because they knew
that Congress was going to have to
revisit another set of expiring laws.
The Trump tax cuts also were set to
expire at the end of this year.
And the Democrats were basically taking
a gamble that probably they would have
enough control in Washington that they
would be able to make some kind of deal
with Republicans where in exchange for
extending the Trump tax cuts, which
Republicans all wanted, that Democrats
would be able to get them to also extend
these Obamacare subsidies. Of course,
what happened is that Republicans swept
to power and had full control of the
government. So, they passed their major
tax and domestic policy bill without
needing any help from Democrats at all.
Not only were Democrats unsuccessful in
getting Republicans to include these
subsidies in their bill, but they also
were unsuccessful in fighting off almost
a trillion dollars in other cuts to
health care, mostly in the Medicaid
program.
>> So, clearly the bet that the Democrats
made when all of this went into effect
did not pan out. I think that's true,
but it's also the kind of bet that
Congress makes all the time. It is not
just Democrats who pass bills with these
expiring provisions hoping that a future
Congress is going to make their
temporary program permanent. And I think
if you look at what's happened since
these subsidies were expanded in the
last few years, enrollment in Obamacare
has more than doubled and most of the
increase has been in Republican states.
Georgia, Florida, and Texas have had
absolutely enormous increases in the
number of people who are enrolled in
this program. And those are people who
are really at risk of losing their
insurance if they suddenly have to pay a
lot more. And the states that are going
to see the biggest increase in prices
for kind of middle inome people who earn
a little bit more than $60,000 are also
going to be in Republican states like
Wyoming, Alaska, and West Virginia. So I
think Democrats feel like they have some
leverage over Republicans. meaning that
there might be some Republicans who are
willing to extend the cuts now because
of the benefits to their constituents,
even if they didn't vote to extend the
same subsidies the first time around.
>> Yeah, Democrats think that maybe
Republicans would actually be willing to
support this program because so many of
their constituents benefit from it.
>> But this is actually a pretty big gamble
because the reality right now is that
the government is shut down and
Americans don't know when the shutdown
is going to end. and Republicans who
control all three branches of
government, they are out there saying
this is the fault of the Democrats.
Anytime you're shutting down the
government, you're taking a pretty big
risk. And the reality is that Democrats
do not have a lot of political control.
But
I think that they feel like healthcare
is a really good issue for them. It's
one that they have run and won on in the
past. It's one that they feel voters
trust them on more than Republicans,
which is not true for a lot of other
issues. And so I think they feel like if
they're going to have a fight, a big
prominent messy fight that's going to
get a lot of attention, they want to
have it on this ground.
[Music]
After the break, Shane Goldmacher on the
last time Democrats used healthc care to
win the political moment against
President Trump.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
>> Shane, thanks for joining us.
>> Thanks for having me on.
>> So, what's happening now? This fight
around healthcare echoes another fight
from the not too distant past and that's
what we want to talk to you about. So
just to start, can you tell us the last
time Democrats used the issue of
healthcare to try to gain the upper hand
against President Trump?
>> Yeah, I mean it was the first year of
his first term. You think back to 2017
and the Democratic Party was feeling a
bit overwhelmed as Trump did so many
different things at once and was
involved in what they felt were so many
scandals and the Mueller investigation
and the FBI directors getting fired and
all these things.
>> And ultimately, those were not the
issues that the Democratic Party ran on
in the 2018 midterms, the first midterm
election of Trump's first term. What
they ended up running on almost
overwhelmingly,
>> this is the issue that is on the ballot.
This election is about healthcare
>> was healthare.
>> How do we preserve the affordable care
act from the assault we know it will
receive?
>> And this was a strategy that Nancy
Pelosi and House Democrats came upon as
Trump and the Republicans tried to
repeal the Obamacare measure.
>> One thing we have to do, repeal and
replace. They had a big repeal and
replace measure.
>> Repeal and replace. Repeal and replace.
Repealing and replacing the disaster
known as Obamacare.
>> It didn't become law. But that didn't
matter. Democrats still used this issue
and said, "Republicans want to take away
your healthcare." Now that Donald Trump
is trying to sabotage Obamacare, I'm
running for Congress to protect and
improve it.
>> And for all of the controversies of
those first couple of Trump years, this
is the one that actually broke through
on television.
>> A year ago today, my own representative,
Congressman Tom MacArthur, introduced a
legislation that tried to take away
healthcare for millions of Americans.
When I saw Congressman Bishop smiling at
the White House after voting to gut
protections for pre-existing conditions,
something inside me broke.
>> This is the one that Democratic
candidates in every corner of the
country ran ads on. Half the political
ads, according to a study after the
election in 2018 that Democrats ran,
half of the ads talked about healthcare.
>> And just remind us, how well did it work
for Democrats in 2018?
>> I mean, it worked pretty well in the
House. They won 40 seats and flipped the
chamber and were able to be a check in
the second half of that first term. They
impeached Donald Trump. They took power.
And so now you have Democrats again a
little overwhelmed by a sea of issues
that the president is stirring up and
settling now into this shutdown fight.
What is the thing they want to stop
Trump on? What is the thing they want to
fight with Trump about? Is it about his
overreach in one place? Is it about
firings of US attorneys? Is it about
investigations? It's back to that same
issue. It's healthcare.
>> Mhm.
>> And unlike in 2017 and 2018 where the
Republicans had tried to act on this
issue and failed, the current Republican
Congress and President Trump have
actually made changes to healthcare
policy. And so the Democratic Party
isn't just running on the theoretical
threats of Republican changes to
healthcare. They're running on the
reality of changes that are set to go
into effect.
>> But just to point out one obvious
difference, right now this is not
technically an election year unlike
2018, but the next election of course is
a midterm election next November. So
with that in mind, how much does this
Democratic strategy that we're talking
about resemble the 2018 playbook?
>> Well, we don't know for sure, right?
They have yet to run ads in a lot of
these districts. The campaign hasn't
been fully formed yet, but what you see
in this shutdown is the Democrats
basically trying to settle on an issue
where they know they're on the winning
side of public opinion. And they're
trying to basically lay the groundwork
for voters to know one year from now
where the two parties are on this. And
look, Ted Cruz and the Republicans
pushed a major shutdown that was a
really big deal in 2013. And guess what?
Republicans want a bunch of seats in the
Congress the next year, right? So the
issue isn't just do you win this
temporary argument around the shutdown.
It can also be do you win the long-term
argument of what your party is seen
fighting for. And that's very much what
the Democratic Party is hoping for that
they can be seen fighting for
healthcare, an issue that they've won
before on and they think that they can
win again on.
>> In other words, they're betting that
healthcare is going to be a bigger deal
than shutting down the government.
>> Absolutely.
>> So how are Republicans responding to
that strategy? I think they're chiefly
so far responding to the shutdown part
of it which is to say first off it's the
Democrats who have shut down this
government for this issue of healthcare
and second to pivot to areas where the
Republican party is more trusted and
that so far has been immigration.
They've been talking about how the
Democrats want to fight for health care
for illegal immigrants, although the
Obamacare subsidies that are at issue
here that the Democrats are demanding be
extended do not apply to people who are
here illegally. But that's the focus,
right? And they're doing it to try to
send a signal that this is actually not
about healthcare, but about spending
money for people who are here illegally,
which polls unpopularly, right? The
Democrats are staking ground on a place
that is popular and the Republicans are
trying to change the ground into a place
that is unpopular.
>> Basically, each side is retreating to
issues that are winning for them in
their own way,
>> their own safe spaces, so to speak.
>> It strikes me that for the strategy to
work that you are describing, Democrats
need to focus on healthcare basically
for as long as possible, right? like
basically is it actually to their
benefit to have Republicans refuse to
meet them halfway so they can keep kind
of pounding on about these rising health
care costs and blame it on the other
side?
>> Look, I think that if the Democratic
party could snap their fingers and have
Republicans actually negotiate over
healthare and strike a deal on this,
they would take that in a heartbeat on a
policy that they care about, that the
Democratic base cares about, that
impacts voters. They would absolutely
take that. Mhm.
>> And look, some Republicans are even open
to negotiations on this exact policy on
whether there should be some subsidies
extended for Obamacare because this does
impact voters, but the Republicans are
pretty universal on.
>> We all understand that Democrats and
Republicans have policy disagreements.
>> And what you heard from JD Vance,
>> you don't have policy disagreements that
serve as the basis for a government
shutdown
>> was that as long as the government is
shut down, you're getting absolutely
nothing. do the right thing, open up the
people's government, and then let's fix
healthcare policy for the American
people. Questions,
>> Jane, do you have any sense about which
side has the upper hand right now?
>> I think it's it's really hard to say,
right? Like the Democratic Party is
fighting on an issue that they think
they have the high ground that is
popular in polling, which is healthcare
and making health care cheaper for
Americans.
But there's a tricky thing here, which
is in order to show that you're fighting
for healthcare, you kind of have to own
that you're shutting down the government
to do it. And voters don't want to see
the government shut down for political
demands. And so each day that the
government stays shut down and more and
more Americans are impacted by the
government shutdown, that people start
missing paychecks, that parks start
closing, that services stop being
offered, it becomes a bigger and bigger
gamble for the Democratic party.
[Music]
>> Shane, thank you so much. Thank you for
having me.
>> On Wednesday evening, the Trump
administration halted billions of
dollars in funds for Democratic le
states while it ready to lay off scores
of government workers. A plan seemingly
intended to maximize pain from the
shutdown. In a series of social media
posts, Russell T. vote. The White House
budget director said that the
administration had paused or moved to
cancel the delivery of about $26 billion
in previously approved funds across a
range of programs, describing the money
as wasteful or in need of further
review.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
The Supreme Court on Wednesday blocked
President Trump's efforts to remove Lisa
Cook from the board of the Federal
Reserve, at least temporarily stying his
efforts to reshape the agency as he
pushes it to lower interest rates.
The court said it would review the
administration's efforts to oust Miss
Cook at oral arguments in January.
Top former Fed and Treasury officials
had warned the court that allowing the
president to fire Miss Cook while
litigation was underway would royal the
markets and undermine public confidence
in the Fed.
And scientist and conservationist Jane
Goodall, who made groundbreaking
discoveries about how chimpanzees behave
and communicate, has died at the age of
91. When I arrived in GMI, I had no idea
what I was going to do, except that I
was going to try and get the chimpanzees
used to me so that I could really learn
about what they were doing.
Goodall observed chimps by living
alongside them on a reserve in what is
now Tanzania beginning in 1960. I've
seen a mother laugh when she hears her
older child who hasn't paid attention
and he hasn't noticed which way she's
gone and that the older child is going
through the forest whimpering, crying,
you know.
After months of working to gain their
trust, she documented the chimps
engaging in behaviors previously thought
to be exclusive to people, including
making and using tools. Bringing the
chimpanzees
into people's lives as individuals, as
personalities, as creatures with whom we
can relate so so um individually. And
that in turn has led to a gradual
blurring of the line that we used to see
as so sharp between us on the one hand
and all the other amazing animals on the
other. Now that line is very blurry
thanks to the chim. Goodall eventually
came to advocate for them and other
wildlife by founding the Jane Goodall
Institute, one of the world's largest
conservation groups.
Today's episode was produced by Olivia
Nat, Nina Feldman, and Stella Tan with
help from Alex Stern. It was edited by
Mark George and Mike Benois. Contains
music by Dan Powell, Marian Lozano, and
Alicia Beup. And was engineered by Chris
Wood.
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.